[R] Generate predict() S3 dispatchers for classed regression and classification bindings (#4199)
mlpack/mlpack: src/mlpack/bindings/R/CMakeLists.txt

# Initialize list of models.
set_property(GLOBAL PROPERTY R_MODELS "")

> # Here 'direcory' is eg 'naive_bayes'), 'name' is 'nbc' and model_ptr_impl always 'include'.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# Here 'directory' is eg 'naive_bayes'), 'name' is 'nbc' and 'model_ptr_impl' always 'include'.
```

But isn't `model_ptr_impl` sometimes `skip`, in the case of a grouped binding?

Author: Yes, rewriting the comment.  When it is 'include' we do the business I added, but I need to check to exclude the other cases.

          -P ${CMAKE_SOURCE_DIR}/CMake/GenerateBinding.cmake)
  add_dependencies(generate_r_${name} r_copy)
  add_dependencies(r_build generate_r_${name})

>   # 3. Create the content previously in generics.R

Reviewer: Once we commit this it's no longer easily accessible what was previously in generics.R 😄 so I might suggest amending this comment to indicate that we are generating the standalone `predict()` function.

  if ("${model_ptr_impl}" STREQUAL "include" AND NOT "${${name}_VALID_METHODS}" STREQUAL "")
    set(GENERATED_GENERIC_PATH "${CMAKE_BINARY_DIR}/src/mlpack/bindings/R/mlpack/R/${name}_generic.R")

>     if (${name}_METHODS MATCHES "probabilities")

Reviewer: I'd be interested in removing the `${name}_METHODS` variable and just depending on `${name}_VALID_METHODS` (it's just one less variable to think about, and they both capture the same thing).  I *think* that you created `${name}_METHODS` in order to have a string instead of a list, and if I understood that right, I *think* this will work:

```
if ("${name}_METHODS}" MATCHES "probabilities")
```

Let me know if I'm wrong on that.

Author: I create _METHODS _on purpose_ as I need all three parts; by the time processing happens _VALID_METHODS generally shrunk down to only  `train` (i.e. element one).  I guestimated that this was due to list processing; the stringified _METHODS overcomes that. 

So it is needed, and should stay.

Reviewer: The _VALID_METHODS variable isn't shrunk down.  I tested this by adding

```
message(STATUS "valid methods is ${${name}_VALID_METHODS}")
```

directly as the first line after this if:

```
  if ("${model_ptr_impl}" STREQUAL "include" AND NOT "${${name}_VALID_METHODS}" STREQUAL "")
```

When I then re-run CMake, I get:

```
$ cmake -DBUILD_R_BINDINGS=ON ../
-- Not building Markdown bindings.
-- Not building Python bindings.
-- Not building Go bindings.
-- Found R: /usr/bin/R (found suitable version "4.6.0", minimum required is "4.0")
-- Found R_roxygen2: /usr/lib/R/site-library/roxygen2
-- Found R_Rcpp: /usr/lib/R/site-library/Rcpp (found suitable version "1.1.1.1.1", minimum required is "0.12.12")
-- Found R_RcppArmadillo: /usr/lib/R/site-library/RcppArmadillo (found suitable version "15.2.6.1", minimum required is "0.10.8.2")
-- Found R_RcppEnsmallen: /home/ryan/R/x86_64-pc-linux-gnu-library/4.6/RcppEnsmallen (found suitable version "0.3.10.0.1", minimum required is "0.2.10.0")
-- Found R_testthat: /home/ryan/R/x86_64-pc-linux-gnu-library/4.6/testthat
-- Found R_pkgbuild: /usr/lib/R/site-library/pkgbuild
-- valid methods: train;predict
-- XXX dir:bayesian_linear_regression name:bayesian_linear_regression mpi:include methods:train_predict
-- valid methods: train;predict
-- XXX dir:lars name:lars mpi:include methods:train_predict
-- valid methods: train;classify;probabilities
-- XXX dir:logistic_regression name:logistic_regression mpi:include methods:train_classify_probabilities
-- valid methods: train;classify;probabilities
-- XXX dir:random_forest name:random_forest mpi:include methods:train_classify_probabilities
-- valid methods: train;classify;probabilities
-- XXX dir:decision_tree name:decision_tree mpi:include methods:train_classify_probabilities
-- valid methods: train;classify
-- XXX dir:perceptron name:perceptron mpi:include methods:train_classify
-- valid methods: train;classify;scores
-- XXX dir:linear_svm name:linear_svm mpi:include methods:train_classify_scores
-- valid methods: train;classify;probabilities
-- XXX dir:adaboost name:adaboost mpi:include methods:train_classify_probabilities
-- valid methods: train;classify;probabilities
-- XXX dir:hoeffding_trees name:hoeffding_tree mpi:include methods:train_classify_probabilities
-- valid methods: train;classify;probabilities
-- XXX dir:naive_bayes name:nbc mpi:include methods:train_classify_probabilities
-- valid methods: train;classify;probabilities
-- XXX dir:softmax_regression name:softmax_regression mpi:include methods:train_classify_probabilities
-- valid methods: train;predict
-- XXX dir:linear_regression name:linear_regression mpi:include methods:train_predict
-- Configuring done (11.7s)
-- Generating done (0.6s)
-- Build files have been written to: /home/ryan/src/mlpack/build
```

and you can see from there that the variable `${${name}_VALID_METHODS}` has all the methods in it.  CMake is awful about how it handles lists vs. strings, so it's possible when you were looking at the VALID_METHODS variable you were only looking at the first method.  If you put it all in quotes, it forces it to be a string, with each element in the list delimited by `;`.

Author: Just trust we when I say that when and where I needed it with three elements, it only had one.

Author: Sigh.  And of course now I can no longer reproduce.  So reverting, _METHODS is gone in c462390b5a which I push once the (r2u-caused) R rerun at CI is done.

      SET(${name}_TYPES "c(\"predictions\", \"probabilities\")")
      # 'else' branch. Different approaches to add newlines failed.
      SET(${name}_ELSE "} else {")
      string(APPEND ${name}_ELSE "   res <- ")
      string(APPEND ${name}_ELSE ${name})
      string(APPEND ${name}_ELSE "_probabilities(input_model=object, newdata, ...)")
    elseif (${name}_METHODS MATCHES "scores")
      SET(${name}_TYPES "c(\"predictions\", \"scores\")")
      # 'else' branch. Different approaches to add newlines failed.
      SET(${name}_ELSE "} else {")
      string(APPEND ${name}_ELSE "   res <- ")
      string(APPEND ${name}_ELSE ${name})
      string(APPEND ${name}_ELSE "_scores(input_model=object, newdata, ...)")
    else()
      SET(${name}_TYPES "c(\"predictions\")")
      SET(${name}_ELSE "")

>     endif()

Reviewer: This won't generalize very well if we ever have any other names of parameters (which will probably happen eventually).  I would suggest an approach a bit different: using the list `${${name}_VALID_METHODS}`, filter out the `"train"` entry, transform `"classify"` or `"predict"` to `"predictions"`, and leave the other elements unchanged.  Then the types list can be assembled into the `${name}_TYPES` string.

Author: That would still miss the 'scores' case.

The above is fine.  I _does_ differentiate between 'have probabilioes' and have not, and it catches the (currently one-off) of 'scores' instead of probabilities.   Refinements can always be made in a subsequent PR.

Reviewer: > That would still miss the 'scores' case.

Unless I overlooked something, it wouldn't, that is why I wrote "leave the other elements unchanged".

I disagree that this is fine; I really would like to solve this in a generic way and it would not take much effort to fix now instead of later.  If you really want to solve it in a subsequent PR, fine, but I would quite strongly prefer that we don't generate the previously hard-coded `generics.R` by simply moving hard-coded bits to elsewhere.

Author: They are not hard-coded.  Hard-coded would mean changes based on ${name} alone.  Which is not what we do here.  It differentiates three cases of a) only predict b) predict and probabilities and c) predict and scores.  These are independent of the method name / directory which should suffice.

    set(REGRESSION_METHODS_LIST "linear_regression" "lars" "bayesian_linear_regression")
    if (${name} IN_LIST REGRESSION_METHODS_LIST)
      SET(${name}_ACTION "predict")
    else()
      SET(${name}_ACTION "classify")

>     endif()

Reviewer: Check out the macro `add_category()` in `src/mlpack/bindings/CMakeLists.txt` (and its usage in `src/mlpack/methods/CMakeLists.txt`).  The upshot is you can use `${name}_CATEGORY` to get the category of the binding in a way that doesn't require hardcoding here, and it should be either `"Regression"` or `"Classification"`.  (And I guess if it's something else we should just throw an error.)

Author: Excellent. Just what I needed, and "somehow knew" we had but just didn't click for.  Changed to

```cmake
    if (${name}_CATEGORY STREQUAL "Regression")
      SET(${name}_ACTION "predict")
    elseif (${name}_CATEGORY STREQUAL "Classification")
      SET(${name}_ACTION "classify")
    else()
      MESSAGE(FATAL_ERROR "Category '${name}_CATEGORY' is not supported")
    endif()
```

and removed the ad-hoc list.

    add_custom_command(
      OUTPUT "${GENERATED_GENERIC_PATH}"
      COMMAND ${CMAKE_COMMAND}
        -DNAME=${name}
        -DR_GENERICS_IN=${CMAKE_SOURCE_DIR}/src/mlpack/bindings/R/R_generics.R.in

>         -DR_GENERICS_OUT=${CMAKE_BINARY_DIR}/src/mlpack/bindings/R/mlpack/R/${name}_generic.R

Reviewer: Does `VERBATIM` mean we don't have to put these arguments in quotes?  In other places I put paths in quotes (like in bash) just in case the user is building mlpack in a directory with a space.

Author: It is my understanding that VERBATIM adds more output to the console.

Reviewer: I don't think that's the case (ref: https://cmake.org/cmake/help/latest/command/add_custom_command.html#generating-files ):

> All arguments to the commands will be escaped properly for the build tool so that the invoked command receives each argument unchanged. Note that one level of escapes is still used by the CMake language processor before add_custom_command even sees the arguments. Use of VERBATIM is recommended as it enables correct behavior. When VERBATIM is not given the behavior is platform specific because there is no protection of tool-specific special characters.
>
> This keyword cannot be used with APPEND (see policy [CMP0175](https://cmake.org/cmake/help/latest/policy/CMP0175.html#policy:CMP0175)). If the appended commands need to be treated as VERBATIM, it must be set on the first call to add_custom_command(OUTPUT...) for the output files.

If you didn't specifically need to escape anything, then I think we could probably remove the keyword?

Author: I see.  I will remove it. If CI misbehaves we can pick up the pieces.

Author: Build fails if I remove VERBATIM.  I suggest to restore it as we had a sequence of four complete continuous integration runs without error whereas we error now.

Reviewer: Thanks for trying... I guess something in there needs to be escaped.

Author: @rcurtin If you can see what would need to be quoted, please give it a try.  My attempts at making it work (locally) without `VERBATIM` failed, and I have not too much interest in chasing this for hours as it a) works with `VERBATIM` and b) the very doc you quote recommends using `VERBATIM` as it does in c) its own examples.

Reviewer: The issue is in the quotations in strings.  If I use, e.g.,

```
-DTYPES=${${name}_TYPES}
```

in the `add_custom_command()` call, then you end up with

```
-DTYPES=c("predictions",\ "scores")
```

in the generated Makefile, which is problematic because of the unescaped quotes.  If you try to work around that with

```
-DTYPES="${${name}_TYPES}"
```

then you end up with

```
-DTYPES="c("predictions",\ "scores")"
```

which still has the same problem, just more quotations.

So the `VERBATIM` turns the `"` into `\"` as needed.

Author: I see.

So I take it you are ok with reverting removal in https://github.com/mlpack/mlpack/pull/4199/commits/228260405442590293bbb7a1ec04ac9f2c52c386 to restore this to working condition?

Reviewer: Absolutely, sorry if I implied otherwise.  I had hoped maybe we could remove it if it wasn't needed, but it definitely is based on your experiment and some further digging.

        -DMETHODS=${${name}_METHODS}
        -DTYPES=${${name}_TYPES}
        -DELSE=${${name}_ELSE}
        -DACTION=${${name}_ACTION}
        -P ${CMAKE_SOURCE_DIR}/CMake/R/makeGenerics.cmake
      DEPENDS ${CMAKE_SOURCE_DIR}/CMake/R/makeGenerics.cmake
        ${CMAKE_SOURCE_DIR}/src/mlpack/bindings/R/R_generics.R.in
      VERBATIM
      COMMENT "Creating ${GENERATED_GENERIC_PATH}")
    add_custom_target(${name}_generic.R
      ALL
      DEPENDS ${GENERATED_GENERIC_PATH})
    add_dependencies(R ${name}_generic.R)

>     message(STATUS "XXX dir:${directory} name:${name} mpi:${model_ptr_impl} methods:${${name}_METHODS}")

Reviewer: Seems like debugging output that could be removed?

          -P ${CMAKE_SOURCE_DIR}/CMake/GenerateBinding.cmake)
  add_dependencies(generate_r_${name} r_copy)
  add_dependencies(r_build generate_r_${name})

  # 3. Create the S3 dispatchers for the generic 'predict()' function
  if ("${model_ptr_impl}" STREQUAL "include" AND NOT "${${name}_VALID_METHODS}" STREQUAL "")
    set(GENERATED_GENERIC_PATH "${CMAKE_BINARY_DIR}/src/mlpack/bindings/R/mlpack/R/${name}_generic.R")

>     if (${name}_VALID_METHODS MATCHES "probabilities")
>       SET(${name}_TYPES "c(\"predictions\", \"probabilities\")")
>       # 'else' branch. Different approaches to add newlines failed.
>       SET(${name}_ELSE "} else {")
>       string(APPEND ${name}_ELSE "   res <- ")
>       string(APPEND ${name}_ELSE ${name})
>       string(APPEND ${name}_ELSE "_probabilities(input_model=object, newdata, ...)")
>     elseif (${name}_VALID_METHODS MATCHES "scores")
>       SET(${name}_TYPES "c(\"predictions\", \"scores\")")
>       # 'else' branch. Different approaches to add newlines failed.
>       SET(${name}_ELSE "} else {")
>       string(APPEND ${name}_ELSE "   res <- ")
>       string(APPEND ${name}_ELSE ${name})
>       string(APPEND ${name}_ELSE "_scores(input_model=object, newdata, ...)")
>     else()
>       SET(${name}_TYPES "c(\"predictions\")")
>       SET(${name}_ELSE "")
>     endif()

Reviewer: What do you think of this alternate generation strategy?

```suggestion
    # Create the list of arguments for the types of predict().
    set(PREDICT_TYPES "")
    set(${name}_ACTION "")
    foreach (method ${${name}_VALID_METHODS})
      if ("${method}" STREQUAL "train")
        # The 'train' binding is ignored here.
        continue()
      elseif ("${method}" STREQUAL "predict" OR "${method}" STREQUAL "classify")
        # Outputs of the "predict" or "classify" binding are called
        # "predictions".
        list(APPEND PREDICT_TYPES "predictions")
      else ()
        # Any other output type, we make no modifications to.
        list(APPEND PREDICT_TYPES "${method}")
      endif ()
    endforeach ()
    
    list(JOIN PREDICT_TYPES "\", \"" PREDICT_TYPES_JOINED)
    set(${name}_TYPES "c(\"${PREDICT_TYPES_JOINED}\")")
    
    # Now generate the "else" branch for cases where we have more than one list
    # element.
    set(${name}_ELSE "")
    foreach (type ${PREDICT_TYPES})
      if ("${type}" STREQUAL "predictions")
        # We don't need to consider predictions in the else statement, since
        # they are already the default path.
        continue()
      endif ()
  
      string(APPEND ${name}_ELSE
          "} else if (type == \"${type}\") {")
      string(APPEND ${name}_ELSE
          "    res <- ${name}_${type}(input_model=object, newdata, ...)")
    endforeach ()

```

I really want to avoid implicit assumptions in the code we generate, otherwise someone writing a new binding might end up with some error that seems totally unrelated.  There were a couple assumptions in the existing code:

 * A binding could only have two possible types of predictions (e.g. `predictions/probabilities` or `predictions/scores`)
 * The only non-predictions types supported were `probabilities` or `scores`

Of course the current code works just fine for existing bindings, since they all satisfy those two assumptions, but I don't think that is a safe long-term bet.  The suggestion here is a bit more flexible but generates basically the same thing, without those two assumptions.

Reviewer: (If you prefer I can open this as a separate PR for more careful review, just let me know.)

Author: In favor of dealing with this later, if deemed needed.  We always have a number of things we _could_ tweak and I am quite frankly happy enough with what we have here: it worked before we added this, it works now, it generalized, it does what it is supposed to do, and it has no hardwired dependencies on a method.

As a related matter, if we wanted to simplify things I would consider removing generation of the one-off scores. I do not think they will be missed, and if they create headaches here maybe removing them is best.

Reviewer: I will open it as a separate PR once this is merged.  We can't remove the generation of the "scores" bit because if we do, then the R functionality does not match what is generated by the other bindings, thus defeating one of the purposes of the entire system (same functionality across all languages).
